# MVC-report
A simple essay on how MVC works

### What is MVC?
#### By Dustin Hays

## Introduction
From the outside MVC or the model, view, and controller architecture can look like a bunch of Rube Goldberg Machines stuffed inside of a filing cabinet. Folders are filled with files containing variables and objects that instigate functions that connect to even more files containing variables and objects that instigate more functions inside even more folders.  Why all the fuss and more importantly why all the stops for deploying a web page? It boils down to the separation of concerns so we as developers can work on a team and design large-scale projects without necessarily knowing what everyone else is doing. It makes our applications modular so if the need arises to change out or add a database, HTML file, or an entirely different templating language it can be done with relative ease while also preventing damage to the rest of the application. Finally, MVC eases the hassle of debugging because no one file can crash the entire application. MVC is a philosophy in organization. It’s a filing system similar to the one that you see on your operating system every day. In the following essay, I will attempt to break down each component of MVC and then finally tie it all together as a working system using Node.js as my primary guide.. 

## Controllers
Everything in MVC starts and ends with the controllers and the controllers can actually be further factored down into controllers and routers but before I get too far ahead of myself let’s discuss what controllers actually do. A controller is going to work a lot like a telephone switchboard operator from the early 20th century. Back then when a person wanted to speak with another person on a phone they needed to utilize a telephone switchboard operator to do so. What this operator would do is deploy a series of jacks and plugs to literally hardwire one telephone to another then break the connection once the conversation had concluded. A controller works in much of the same fashion but instead of hardwiring telephones together it's connecting a user’s browser to an application’s database and interface. When a browser makes a request to a website it is done along a specific path like www.example.com. Inside the application’s server.js file, the user’s path gets redirected to a router file where it is filtered by request (requests are defined by REST architecture create, read, update, and delete or CRUD for short) and then sent to its corresponding controller for implementation. Controllers can ferry information between folders and deliver a response to the browser. It is also important to note that controllers and routers can be combined inside one folder or separated out into two depending on your application's size and requirements. Controllers are the literal backbone of any MVC architecture.

## View
Inside of the view is where a programmer will store all files about the user interface(UI) or in other words what the user sees and interacts with when they are visiting a website. At the heart of any web page is an HTML document. Sometimes this document is given style or behavior with CSS or JavaScript but at its core, the user is viewing HTML. The problem with HTML is that it’s a recorded stored document like a pdf, photograph, or painting. This is referred to as a static web page and if we wanted to implement changes to our page, for example, changing a list of phone numbers or updating a list of sale items we would physically need to go inside of the document and rewrite the code. The architecture behind MVC on the other hand is designed to present a web page in conjunction with database information when necessary. This is called a dynamic web page and it is accomplished by using a templating engine. What a templating engine does is allow database information to be passed into an HTML document as elements. Examples of database engines include Ejs, Jade, Pug, HandlebarsJS, and Mustache. What information is passed inside of a templated web page is contingent upon the assigned controllers. These templated web pages produce HTML and can still be linked to external CSS and JavaScript files. It is important to note that the view is connected to an application through the controller folder and will never communicate directly with the model.


## Model
Last in the MVC lineup is the model and what the model does is interact with the database giving and receiving information. I like to think of the model as an old-time clerk in a country store and the controller as a farmer coming into town for supplies. The farmer has a list of needs and hands that list over to the clerk where the clerk disappears behind the counter and then comes back with what the farmer has asked for. Other times the farmer comes into town with supplies and the shopkeeper puts them away. The important distinction to note inside of this analogy is the respective sides of the counter the model and controller occupy. That line is never crossed. The model works the shelves of the database retrieving, storing, and manipulating data. At its root, a database is nothing more than a group of objects stored on some kind of server that is accessible by some kind of application program. An application program can be anything from VS Code to Facebook. What separates one database from another is its database management system or DBMS for short. There are numerous ways to model a DBMS but for this essay databases can be divided into two groups SQL and NoSQL. SQL stands for structured query language so an SQL database is going to have its rules or schemas baked in whereas a NoSQL database will have no such rules in place. It is important to note that when using a NoSQL database it is possible to add an object document mapping library (ODM) into the model of one’s backend application in order to build custom schemas. An example of this would be Mongoose to mongoDB. A schema is a data template that works like a filter to a database. It ensures that the data being delivered is correct. Schema templating, baked in or not, is incorporated inside of the model. The model can utilize anything from a simple json file to a multitude of different databases varying in their database management systems.  
 
## Conclusion
MVC was first introduced in 1976 by Tygve Reenskaug inside of an object oriented programming language called “Smalltalk” and since its induction it has grown to become one of the most widespread and influential patterns in modern website frameworks. MVC is an architectural philosophy and because of this, its implementation can vary from framework to framework. MVC is a way to “dumb down” code so each part of an application is easy to understand, find and debug. The goal when using MVC is to promote code usability and implement the separation of concerns on the backend. As technologies continue to advance and companies continue to strive for the next best thing a modular application becomes an absolute necessity. Pages and databases can be changed, added or removed. The line of action for any given request becomes easy to follow, update and manipulate. A website can be constantly evolving while staying deployed to the internet but keep in mind when using MVC size does matter. MVC is complex by nature and best suited for environments where a programmer is working on a large-scale project or with multiple engineers. It is however considered a workplace standard and as integral to backend programming as putting HTML, CSS and JavaScript in separate files on the frontend. Mastery of these core concepts is paramount to every career in web development.


